---
layout: lesson
<!---title:  Benefits<sup>1</sup>,<sup>4</sup>,<sup>5</sup>--->
---

The most important benefit of tamoxifen (and similar drugs) is reducing the risk of breast cancer 	returning and the risk of a new cancer developing in the other breast. However, for tamoxifen to be 	effective in lowering your risk of breast cancer recurrence, it is essential that you take the medicine 	exactly as prescribed by your doctor. Do not stop, skip or change the dosage of any medicines without 	your doctor’s approval. Try to take tamoxifen at the same time every day.

Tamoxifen can also: 
* Shrink large hormone-receptor-positive breast cancers before surgery;
* Slow or stop the growth of advanced hormone-receptor-positive breast cancer in both pre- and post-menopausal women;
* Reduce the number of breast cancer deaths;
* Improve overall survival; and
* Lower breast cancer risk in women who have a higher than average risk of disease but who don’t have the disease.

In addition, tamoxifen may have extra health benefits:
* Tamoxifen may improve blood cholesterol by lowering LDL levels (the “bad” cholesterol), which in turn, can lower the risk of heart disease.
* Tamoxifen may help maintain bone density, which in turn can lower the risk of osteoporosis and bone fractures in postmenopausal women.

**References:**

<span style="font-size:15px;">National Cancer Institute, 2017. Hormone Therapy for Breast Cancer Fact Sheet</span>

<span style="font-size:15px;">Susan G. Komen, 2018. Tamoxifen.</span>

<span style="font-size:15px;">Breastcancer.org, 2016. Extending Aromatase Inhibitor Use Beyond 5 Years May Benefit Some Women</span>


