---
layout: lesson
<!---title:  How to manage common side effects--->
---
**Hot flashes/Night Sweats** are sudden and strong feelings of warmth or heat, especially over the face, neck, and chest. Hot flashes can cause heavy sweating and may leave you chilled. Your doctor may prescribe you non-hormonal medications such as antidepressants or nerve pain medicines that may decrease hot flashes. Beyond medication, there are certain things you can do to help.

Patients should also pay attention to what triggers the hot flashes (i.e., stress, alcohol, spicy foods, caffeine) and avoid those triggers as much as possible. 

Tips to Manage Hot Flashes: 

* Avoid caffeine and hot drinks.
* Avoid hot or spicy foods.
* Limit alcohol.
* Keep an ice pack under your bed pillow.
* Keep your home or bedroom cool.
* Dress in layers. Wear absorbent cotton clothing in layers that can be easily removed.
* Use sprays or moist wipes to help lower skin temperature.
* Quit smoking.
* Use relaxation techniques.
* Get acupuncture. 
* Exercise. In addition to helping with joint discomfort and bone loss, exercise can help you with hot flashes.

**Irregular periods or spotting.** If you are premenopausal and are taking tamoxifen, you may experience menstrual irregularities, vaginal bleeding or the complete stoppage of menstrual periods. Depending on your age, your periods may resume during or after completion of your tamoxifen course. Please talk with your doctor if you are having irregular periods or spotting, and discuss any related concerns with your health care provider.

**Loss of sex drive.** Hormone therapy may cause a loss of desire. Many women struggle with issues that affect sexuality after a breast cancer diagnosis. Talk with your doctor if you are experiencing loss of sex drive, s/he can treat physical symptoms that are affecting your sex life. A mental health care provider (such as a psychologist, sex therapist, social worker) or a counselor also may recommend available treatment or support services. 

* Support groups can provide a safe place for you to talk about your problems with other women who understand you on a personal level.
* To find specialists trained in sexual health treatment for cancer survivors, refer to the American Association of Sexuality Educators, Counselors and Therapists (AASECT) at [www.aasect.org](www.aasect.org) or the International Society for the Study of Women’s Sexual Health (ISSWSH) at [www.isswsh.org](www.isswsh.org).


**Vaginal dryness/Itching.** Vaginal dryness can cause pain during intercourse, vaginal soreness, and itching. It is one of the most common menopausal symptoms reported by women, and it is important to talk to your physician about it. There are over-the-counter and prescription options to relieve vaginal dryness, so talk with your healthcare team about which option is best for you. 

Tips to manage vaginal dryness:

* Use vaginal moisturizers (such as Replens or Hyalo Gyn) on a regular basis. Vaginal moisturizers are estrogen-free. Because they do not contain estrogen, they are safe for breast cancer survivors. They need to be used regularly, not just at the time of intercourse. Vaginal moisturizers are available over-the-counter.
* Use water- or silicon-based lubricants before sexual intercourse, which provide a temporary smooth feeling in the vagina; however, they do not provide longer-term moisturization as vaginal moisturizers do.
* Use over-the-counter antifungal creams to provide relief for yeast infections.


**Pain during sex or dyspareunia.** Pain during sex is a legitimate health concern that can affect you and your partner. There are many things that can cause pain during sex, so you should talk to your doctor about the type of pain you are experiencing so that s/he can determine what sort of treatment is best for you. 

Some treatment options include:

* Vaginal moisturizers are estrogen-free, over-the-counter moisturizers that are used regularly, rather than just at the time of intercourse. It keeps the vaginal area moisturized, unlike a lubricant which only makes the vaginal area slippery and is generally only used at the time of intercourse.
* Vaginal lubricants that are either water or silicone based are used for sexual activity to increase comfort and pleasure.
* Pelvic floor physical therapy is useful for women with tight or tender muscles. Working on pelvic floor muscle health can keep muscles relaxed and reduce pain during sex.
* Vaginal dilators can be useful for women with pain during penetration. The dilator increases comfort during intercourse by stretching the vagina and reducing tightness. 
* Vaginal lidocaine is a topical treatment applied to the vaginal opening before sexual intercourse. It can help decrease pain.

**Fatigue.** You may experience fatigue if you feel tired all the time, regardless of whether you are sleeping and resting well or not. 

Many things, including cancer treatments, not eating enough, lack of sleep, depression, low-blood counts, or some medicines can cause fatigue. 

Tips to manage fatigue:

* Talk with your medial team if you are experiencing fatigue all the time. If there is a medical cause, your doctor will be able to treat it.
* Try to prioritize your activities. Do the most important ones when you have the most energy.
* Take short walks or get regular exercise, if you can. More and more research tells us that being active can help decrease fatigue.
* Stay hydrated because dehydration makes fatigue worse. Drinking 8 cups of clear fluids every day is a common recommendation.
* Nap smart. Take 3 or 4 short naps or rest breaks during the day instead of 1 long nap.
* Try to do easier or shorter versions of your usual activities.
* Don’t take large amounts of vitamins or minerals without talking to your medial team first. Large doses of some supplements can have harmful effects.

**References:**

<span style="font-size:15px;">Mayo Clinic, 2018. Hot flashes: Symptoms & causes.</span>

<span style="font-size:15px;">Mayo Clinic, 2018. Hot flashes: Diagnosis & treatment.</span>

<span style="font-size:15px;">Susan G. Komen, 2016. Sexuality and intimacy.</span>

<span style="font-size:15px;">Susan G. Komen, 2016. Treating menopausal symptoms.</span>

<span style="font-size:15px;">American Society, 2017. Sexual Health and Cancer Treatment: Women.</span>

<span style="font-size:15px;">American Cancer Society, 2015. Fatigue.</span>
